# Cases

The grammatical term _case_ can be thought of as a _role_. Each sentence
contains things (nouns) interacting with eachother, and each thing has a role to
play. The reason this matters is that sometimes (but not always) nouns are
modified depending on their case.

In English, most nouns aren't altered depending on case, but a small number are.
One example is that the words _I_ and _me_ are really the same word in different
cases.

There are only two main cases you need to worry about in Irish, (_nominative_
and _genitive_) but I'll explain all cases below for completeness.

Let's consider our simple sentence again:

_He hit a tennis ball firmly with the blue racket_.


## Nominative

_He_ is the _subject_ of the sentence. _He_ is the thing from which everything
else is originating, and in particular, the verb _hit_ is what _he_ is doing.
In grammatical terms, the subject of a sentence is in _the nominative case_, or
_an tuiseal ainmneach_.


## Accusative

_A tennis ball_ is the object of the sentence. It is the thing that is being
directly affected by the verb _hit_. In grammatical terms, the object of a
sentence is in _the accusative case_ or _an tuiseal cuspóireach_. In Irish, the
same rules apply for the nominative and accusative cases. There is never any
need to distinguish them.


## Genitive

The word _tennis_ is a noun that qualifies another noun. One way to think of it
is that the racket is _of tennis_. Whenever this happens, the noun that
is doing the qualifying is in _the genitive case_, or _an tuiseal ginideach_.

The Genitive case is used to indicate posession or another relationship between
the nouns. To illustrate genitive further, Consider another phrase _John's car_.
The word _John's_ performs the same function as _tennis_, in that it is the car
_of John_, and _John's_ is the genitive case version of _John_.


## Dative

The phrase _the blue racket_ follows a preposition (_with_), and therefore is in
_the dative case_, or _an tuiseal tabharthach_. For the most part, the dative
case follows the same rules as the nominative case, but there are a few
exceptions.


## Vocative

There is one other case in Irish, _the vocative case_ or _an tuiseal gairmeach_.
This is used for addressing people (e.g. _'A Shéain!'_).


----
Next, [Nouns &#8594;](04_nouns.md)